README.md, before:

# Data Analyst Interview Preparation Guide

## 📋 Table of Contents
- [Personal Introduction](#personal-introduction)
- [Project Deep Dives](#project-deep-dives)
- [Behavioral Questions](#behavioral-questions)
- [Technical Questions](#technical-questions)
  - [Python](#python-basic-to-moderate)
  - [SQL](#sql-most-common-for-data-analyst)
  - [Power BI](#power-bi-concept--visualization)
  - [Excel](#excel-functional--practical)
  - [OOPs](#oops-object-oriented-programming)

---

## Personal Introduction

Hello, I'm **Om Jumde**, a final-year IT student from the Government College of Engineering.

During my final year, I worked on two projects in Power BI — an **Amazon Sales Dashboard** and a **Customer Churn Analysis**.

Throughout my academic journey, I've also explored areas like web development and cybersecurity. However, after completing these Power BI projects, I realized that my true interest lies in working with data — analyzing it, visualizing insights, and turning information into decisions.

Apart from academics, I've been the **Club Head of the Hackslash Coding Club**, where I mentored my juniors on their projects across different domains.

---

## Project Deep Dives

### 🛒 Amazon Sales Dashboard

One of my key projects involved building a comprehensive **Sales Performance Dashboard** for an e-commerce company that generated around **$1.57 million in revenue** across nearly **6,000 orders**.

**The Challenge:**  
Stakeholders lacked a clear, real-time view of regional performance, sales trends, and profitability, which slowed down their decision-making.

**My Approach:**

1. **Data Modeling:** Designed a **star schema data model** in SQL Server with dimension tables for products, customers, and regions, and a central fact table for sales transactions
2. **Integration:** Connected the optimized model to Power BI
3. **Advanced Analytics:** Created measures using DAX for profit margins, year-over-year growth, and regional comparisons
4. **Visualization:** Built an interactive dashboard with drill-down capabilities by region, product category, and time period

**Business Impact:**
- ✅ Reduced report refresh time by **40%**
- ✅ Improved data accuracy
- ✅ Enabled real-time decision-making
- ✅ Helped optimize regional sales strategies and focus on high-performing categories

---

### 🏦 Customer Churn Analysis

I worked on a **Bank Customer Churn Analysis** dashboard for a retail bank that wanted to understand why customers were leaving.

**The Challenge:**  
The bank had over **10,000 customer records**, but their existing reports didn't show clear churn patterns, making it difficult to design retention strategies.

**My Approach:**

1. **Data Integration:** Built a star schema data model in Power BI, integrating multiple sources including customer demographics, credit card usage, and activity data
2. **Analysis:** Used DAX and Power BI visuals to analyze monthly churn trends, region-wise performance, and credit card holder churn rates
3. **Interactivity:** Created a fully interactive dashboard enabling marketing and product teams to filter and explore customer segments dynamically

**Key Findings:**
- 🔍 Discovered a **429% spike in churn** following a policy change
- 💰 Projected that targeted retention strategies could recover approximately **$250,000 in annual revenue**

**Business Impact:**  
This project showcased my ability to connect data insights to business outcomes and emphasized the power of using BI tools for strategic decision-making.

---

## Behavioral Questions

### 💡 What motivated you to pursue data analytics?

Initially, I was more into development, but when I worked on my Power BI projects, I saw how data could tell powerful stories. Seeing business decisions change based on insights I built really motivated me. I realized analytics sits perfectly between **logic, technology, and business** — and that blend is what excites me most.

---

### 📊 What kind of datasets have you worked with in your projects?

I've worked with e-commerce sales data and bank customer data:

- **Amazon Sales Dashboard:** Handled data of over **6,000 orders** and **$1.57M in revenue**, cleaning and modeling it using SQL before connecting to Power BI
- **Customer Churn Project:** Worked with **10,000+ customer records**, combining demographics, credit usage, and activity data to find churn trends

---

### ⚙️ Which tool do you enjoy the most: Power BI, SQL, or Excel — and why?

I enjoy **Power BI** the most because it allows me to connect technical and business perspectives. I like how you can take cleaned data from SQL or Excel, use DAX for dynamic calculations, and visualize insights that directly help decision-makers. It's satisfying to see the complete story of data come alive visually.

---

### 🧠 How do you approach a new dataset when given for analysis?

My approach is structured:

1. **Understand the business problem** — what question we're trying to answer
2. **Explore the dataset** — look at column names, missing values, and data types
3. **Clean and model the data** using SQL or Power Query
4. **Analyze patterns** using summaries, visualizations, or measures
5. **Present insights clearly** — usually through dashboards or reports that answer the main question

---

### 🚧 What are some challenges you faced in your projects and how did you overcome them?

**Amazon Sales Dashboard:**  
The dataset was very messy with inconsistent region names and missing profit values. I overcame this by cleaning and standardizing data using Power Query and designing a star schema in SQL Server.

**Churn Project:**  
I struggled with performance issues when combining multiple tables, so I optimized the model and replaced calculated columns with DAX measures — which made the dashboard run faster.

---

### 💼 What kind of business impact did your dashboards bring?

**Amazon Sales Dashboard:**
- Identified high-performing product categories and regions
- Improved decision-making
- Reduced report generation time by **40%**

**Customer Churn Project:**
- Discovered a **429% spike in churn** after a policy change
- Projected recovery of **$250,000 in annual revenue** through targeted retention strategies

---

### 🚀 Where do you see yourself in the next 2 years in the data domain?

In the next two years, I see myself growing as a Data Analyst who's not just technically sound but also understands business needs deeply. I want to work on real-world datasets, build dashboards that drive decisions, and gradually move toward advanced analytics and predictive insights.

---

## Technical Questions

## 🐍 Python (Basic to Moderate)

### 1️⃣ What are Python variables? How do you declare them?

Variables in Python are containers used to store data values. You don't need to explicitly declare their data type — Python infers it automatically.

```python
name = "Om"
age = 22
```

Here, `name` is a string, and `age` is an integer.

---

### 2️⃣ Difference between mutable and immutable data types in Python?

**Mutable:** Can be changed after creation (like lists, dictionaries, sets)  
**Immutable:** Cannot be changed once created (like strings, tuples, integers)

```python
a = [1, 2, 3]  # mutable
b = (1, 2, 3)  # immutable
```

---

### 3️⃣ What are lists, tuples, and dictionaries?

- **List:** Ordered, mutable collection  
  Example: `[1, 2, 3]`

- **Tuple:** Ordered, immutable collection  
  Example: `(1, 2, 3)`

- **Dictionary:** Key-value pairs  
  Example: `{"name": "Om", "age": 22}`

---

### 4️⃣ How do you remove duplicates from a list?

Convert it to a set and back to a list:

```python
mylist = [1, 2, 2, 3]
unique_list = list(set(mylist))
```

---

### 5️⃣ Write or explain a pseudo code for a prime number check

```python
num = int(input("Enter number: "))
if num > 1:
    for i in range(2, int(num**0.5) + 1):
        if num % i == 0:
            print("Not Prime")
            break
    else:
        print("Prime")
else:
    print("Not Prime")
```

**Logic:** Loop from 2 to √n and check divisibility.

---

### 6️⃣ What are functions in Python? Give an example

Functions are reusable blocks of code that perform a specific task.

```python
def greet(name):
    return f"Hello, {name}"
```

---

### 7️⃣ What are modules and libraries?

- **Module:** A single Python file containing code (functions, classes)
- **Library:** A collection of related modules packaged together

For example, `math` is a module; `pandas` is a library.

---

### 8️⃣ What libraries are used for data analysis in Python?

Common ones are:

- **Pandas** for data manipulation
- **NumPy** for numerical operations
- **Matplotlib / Seaborn** for visualization
- **Scikit-learn** for machine learning

---

### 9️⃣ How do you handle missing values in a dataset?

Using Pandas:

```python
df.dropna()        # remove missing values
df.fillna(value)   # replace with mean/median or a constant
```

Choice depends on data and context.

---

### 🔟 What's the difference between `is` and `==` operators?

- `==` compares values
- `is` compares memory locations (object identity)

```python
a = [1,2]
b = [1,2]
a == b  # True
a is b  # False
```

---

## 🗄️ SQL (Most Common for Data Analyst)

### 1️⃣ What is SQL?

SQL stands for **Structured Query Language** — used to store, manipulate, and retrieve data from relational databases.

---

### 2️⃣ What are joins?

Joins combine rows from two or more tables based on a related column.

---

### 3️⃣ Explain INNER JOIN, LEFT JOIN, RIGHT JOIN, and FULL OUTER JOIN

- **INNER JOIN:** Returns only matching rows from both tables
- **LEFT JOIN:** All rows from the left table + matching from right
- **RIGHT JOIN:** All rows from right + matching from left
- **FULL OUTER JOIN:** Returns all records from both sides

```sql
SELECT a.name, b.order_id
FROM Customers a
LEFT JOIN Orders b
ON a.customer_id = b.customer_id;
```

---

### 4️⃣ Difference between WHERE and HAVING clauses?

- **WHERE** filters rows before aggregation
- **HAVING** filters after aggregation

```sql
SELECT city, COUNT(*) FROM customers
GROUP BY city
HAVING COUNT(*) > 5;
```

---

### 5️⃣ What is a primary key and a foreign key?

- **Primary key:** Unique identifier for each record in a table
- **Foreign key:** A reference to the primary key in another table

---

### 6️⃣ What is normalization? Why is it important?

Normalization is the process of organizing data to reduce redundancy and improve data integrity. It divides large tables into smaller, related ones.

---

### 7️⃣ Difference between COUNT(*), COUNT(column_name)?

- `COUNT(*)` counts all rows including NULLs
- `COUNT(column_name)` ignores NULLs

---

### 8️⃣ Write a query to get the second highest salary

```sql
SELECT MAX(salary)
FROM employees
WHERE salary < (SELECT MAX(salary) FROM employees);
```

---

### 9️⃣ Explain GROUP BY and ORDER BY clauses

- **GROUP BY** groups rows with the same values
- **ORDER BY** sorts results (ASC/DESC)

```sql
SELECT department, COUNT(*) 
FROM employees 
GROUP BY department 
ORDER BY COUNT(*) DESC;
```

---

### 🔟 Difference between DELETE, TRUNCATE, and DROP

- **DELETE:** Removes specific rows (can use WHERE)
- **TRUNCATE:** Removes all rows, keeps structure
- **DROP:** Deletes the entire table

---

### 1️⃣1️⃣ What are subqueries and when do you use them?

A subquery is a query inside another query, used to filter, compare, or aggregate data dynamically.

---

### 1️⃣2️⃣ How to find customers who never placed an order?

```sql
SELECT c.customer_id, c.name
FROM Customers c
LEFT JOIN Orders o
ON c.customer_id = o.customer_id
WHERE o.customer_id IS NULL;
```

---

## 📊 Power BI (Concept + Visualization)

### 1️⃣ What is Power BI?

Power BI is a business intelligence tool that helps visualize and analyze data using interactive dashboards.

---

### 2️⃣ Key components of Power BI

- **Power Query:** Data extraction and transformation
- **Power Pivot:** Data modeling
- **DAX:** Calculations and measures
- **Visualizations:** Charts, reports, dashboards

---

### 3️⃣ What types of graphs or charts have you used?

Bar, line, pie, map, tree map, and funnel charts.

For example, I used a line chart for monthly trends and bar charts for regional comparisons.

---

### 4️⃣ Difference between Power Query and Power Pivot

- **Power Query:** Used for data cleaning and transformation
- **Power Pivot:** Used for modeling and relationships

---

### 5️⃣ What is DAX? Examples

DAX (Data Analysis Expressions) is used to create calculated columns/measures.

```dax
Profit Margin = DIVIDE(SUM(Sales[Profit]), SUM(Sales[Revenue]))
```

---

### 6️⃣ What is a star schema?

A star schema has one fact table linked to multiple dimension tables. It's used for efficient querying and simpler data modeling.

---

### 7️⃣ How do you make dashboards interactive?

By adding slicers, filters, bookmarks, and drill-throughs so users can explore data dynamically.

---

### 8️⃣ What are measures and calculated columns?

- **Measure:** Calculated at query time (e.g., SUM, AVG)
- **Calculated column:** Stored with data; calculated row-wise

---

### 9️⃣ How to handle large datasets efficiently?

Filter at data source, use star schema, avoid complex visuals, and use measures instead of calculated columns.

---

### 🔟 How to publish and share dashboards?

After creating, publish via Power BI Service, then share links, workspaces, or embed in apps.

---

## 🧮 Excel (Functional + Practical)

### 1️⃣ How much do you know Excel?

I'd rate myself 8/10 — I've used Excel for cleaning, analyzing data, and building summary dashboards.

---

### 2️⃣ Common functions used for analysis

`SUMIF`, `COUNTIF`, `VLOOKUP`, `INDEX-MATCH`, `IFERROR`, `TEXT`, and logical functions like `IF` and `AND`.

---

### 3️⃣ What is a Pivot Table?

A Pivot Table helps summarize and analyze data quickly — grouping and aggregating large datasets without formulas.

---

### 4️⃣ What is conditional formatting?

It highlights cells based on rules — for example, marking sales below 5000 in red.

---

### 5️⃣ How to remove duplicates in Excel?

Go to **Data → Remove Duplicates**, or use formulas like `=UNIQUE(A2:A10)` in newer versions.

---

### 6️⃣ What is a dynamic chart?

A chart that updates automatically when data changes — usually built using named ranges or tables.

---

### 7️⃣ How to handle missing data?

Use filters to find blanks and either replace with average/median or mark as "Not Available."

---

### 8️⃣ Absolute vs Relative cell referencing

- **Absolute:** Fixed reference (`$A$1`)
- **Relative:** Changes when copied (`A1`)

---

### 9️⃣ Data validation in Excel

Used to restrict data entry — e.g., allowing only dates or numbers within a range.

---

### 🔟 Reports or dashboards built in Excel

I've built sales summaries using Pivot Tables, slicers, and conditional formatting before moving to Power BI.

---

## 🧩 OOPs (Object-Oriented Programming)

### 1️⃣ What is OOPs and why is it useful?

Object-Oriented Programming helps structure code using objects and classes, making it reusable, modular, and easier to maintain.

---

### 2️⃣ Four main pillars of OOPs

1. **Encapsulation**
2. **Inheritance**
3. **Polymorphism**
4. **Abstraction**

---

### 3️⃣ Explain inheritance with an example

It allows a class to inherit properties from another.

```python
class Animal:
    def sound(self): 
        print("Animal sound")

class Dog(Animal):
    def sound(self): 
        print("Bark")
```

---

### 4️⃣ What is encapsulation?

Encapsulation means wrapping data and methods together. It protects data from unauthorized access.

Example: Private variables in a class.

---

### 5️⃣ Abstract class vs Interface

- **Abstract class:** Can have both concrete and abstract methods
- **Interface:** Only defines method signatures (no implementation)

---

### 6️⃣ Method overloading vs Method overriding

- **Overloading:** Same method name, different parameters
- **Overriding:** Same method name in child class modifies parent behavior

---

### 7️⃣ What does the `self` keyword do in Python?

`self` refers to the current instance of the class and allows access to class variables.

---

### 8️⃣ Difference between a class and an object

- **Class:** Blueprint or template
- **Object:** Instance of that class

---

### 9️⃣ How is implementing different from inheriting?

- **Inheriting:** Reusing existing code (class-based)
- **Implementing:** Writing code to fulfill an interface or abstract definition

---

### 🔟 Real-life examples of OOP concepts

- **Encapsulation:** Bank account balance access
- **Inheritance:** Car inheriting from Vehicle
- **Polymorphism:** Same "start()" method for Bike, Car
- **Abstraction:** Using ATM — we don't see internal code, only operations

---

## 📝 Quick Tips for Interviews

✅ **Be specific** with numbers and impacts in your project stories  
✅ **Use the STAR method** (Situation, Task, Action, Result) for behavioral questions  
✅ **Practice SQL queries** on paper or whiteboard  
✅ **Prepare 2-3 questions** to ask the interviewer  
✅ **Stay calm** and think aloud when solving technical problems

---

**Good luck with your interviews! 🚀**

Commit message:

Revise project summaries in README.md
Updated project descriptions for Amazon Sales Dashboard and Customer Churn Analysis, enhancing clarity and detail.

README.md, after:

# Data Analyst Interview Preparation Guide

## 📋 Table of Contents
- [Personal Introduction](#personal-introduction)
- [Project Deep Dives](#project-deep-dives)
- [Behavioral Questions](#behavioral-questions)
- [Technical Questions](#technical-questions)
  - [Python](#python-basic-to-moderate)
  - [SQL](#sql-most-common-for-data-analyst)
  - [Power BI](#power-bi-concept--visualization)
  - [Excel](#excel-functional--practical)
  - [OOPs](#oops-object-oriented-programming)

---

## Personal Introduction

Hello, I'm **Om Jumde**, a final-year IT student from the Government College of Engineering.

During my final year, I worked on two projects in Power BI — an **Amazon Sales Dashboard** and a **Customer Churn Analysis**.

Throughout my academic journey, I've also explored areas like web development and cybersecurity. However, after completing these Power BI projects, I realized that my true interest lies in working with data — analyzing it, visualizing insights, and turning information into decisions.

Apart from academics, I've been the **Club Head of the Hackslash Coding Club**, where I mentored my juniors on their projects across different domains.

---

## Project Deep Dives

### 🛒 Amazon Sales Dashboard

**Q: Can you walk me through your Amazon Sales Dashboard project?**

Sure! So this was one of my key projects where I built a comprehensive Sales Performance Dashboard for an e-commerce dataset that had around **$1.57 million in revenue** across nearly **6,000 orders**.

The main problem I was trying to solve was that the raw data didn't provide a clear view of regional performance, sales trends, or profitability. Decision-makers needed a unified view to understand what was driving sales and where opportunities existed.

My approach was to first organize the data properly. The dataset was quite messy initially, so I designed a **star schema data model** in SQL Server. I created dimension tables for products, customers, and regions, and a central fact table for all the sales transactions. This structure made the data much faster to query and analyze.

Once I had the data model ready, I connected it to Power BI. Using **DAX**, I created custom measures for things like profit margins, year-over-year growth comparisons, and regional performance metrics.

For the visualization layer, I built an interactive dashboard where users could drill down into sales by region, product category, and different time periods. I added slicers and filters to make it really dynamic and user-friendly.

The results were quite impactful — we **reduced report refresh time by 40%**, improved overall data accuracy, and most importantly, stakeholders could now make decisions in real-time. The dashboard helped identify high-performing product categories and regions, which directly influenced their sales strategies.

---

### 🏦 Customer Churn Analysis

**Q: Tell me about your Customer Churn Analysis project.**

Absolutely! This was a really interesting project where I worked with a retail bank dataset to understand customer churn patterns.

The bank had over **10,000 customer records**, but their existing reports weren't showing clear patterns about why customers were leaving. This made it really difficult for them to design effective retention strategies.

I started by integrating data from multiple sources — customer demographics, credit card usage patterns, and account activity data. I built a **star schema data model** in Power BI to organize all this information efficiently.

Then, using **DAX** and various Power BI visualizations, I analyzed monthly churn trends, region-wise performance, and specifically looked at credit card holder churn rates. I made sure the dashboard was fully interactive with slicers and filters, so the marketing and product teams could explore different customer segments on their own.

One of the most significant findings from my analysis was a **429% spike in churn** that occurred right after a particular policy change. This spike had actually gone unnoticed before my analysis, and it clearly showed the negative business impact of that decision.

Based on my analysis and the patterns I identified, I calculated that implementing targeted retention strategies for high-risk customer segments could potentially recover approximately **$250,000 in annual revenue** by preventing future customer loss.

What I really enjoyed about this project was how it demonstrated the direct link between data insights and business strategy. It wasn't just about creating visualizations — it was about telling a story that could drive real business decisions.

---

## Behavioral Questions

### 💡 What motivated you to pursue data analytics?

Initially, I was more into development, but when I worked on my Power BI projects, I saw how data could tell powerful stories. Seeing business decisions change based on insights I built really motivated me. I realized analytics sits perfectly between **logic, technology, and business** — and that blend is what excites me most.

---

### 📊 What kind of datasets have you worked with in your projects?

I've worked with e-commerce sales data and bank customer data:

- **Amazon Sales Dashboard:** Handled data of over **6,000 orders** and **$1.57M in revenue**, cleaning and modeling it using SQL before connecting to Power BI
- **Customer Churn Project:** Worked with **10,000+ customer records**, combining demographics, credit usage, and activity data to find churn trends

---

### ⚙️ Which tool do you enjoy the most: Power BI, SQL, or Excel — and why?

I enjoy **Power BI** the most because it allows me to connect technical and business perspectives. I like how you can take cleaned data from SQL or Excel, use DAX for dynamic calculations, and visualize insights that directly help decision-makers. It's satisfying to see the complete story of data come alive visually.

---

### 🧠 How do you approach a new dataset when given for analysis?

My approach is structured:

1. **Understand the business problem** — what question we're trying to answer
2. **Explore the dataset** — look at column names, missing values, and data types
3. **Clean and model the data** using SQL or Power Query
4. **Analyze patterns** using summaries, visualizations, or measures
5. **Present insights clearly** — usually through dashboards or reports that answer the main question

---

### 🚧 What are some challenges you faced in your projects and how did you overcome them?

**Amazon Sales Dashboard:**  
The dataset was very messy with inconsistent region names and missing profit values. I overcame this by cleaning and standardizing data using Power Query and designing a star schema in SQL Server.

**Churn Project:**  
I struggled with performance issues when combining multiple tables, so I optimized the model and replaced calculated columns with DAX measures — which made the dashboard run faster.

---

### 💼 What kind of business impact did your dashboards bring?

**Amazon Sales Dashboard:**
- Identified high-performing product categories and regions
- Improved decision-making
- Reduced report generation time by **40%**

**Customer Churn Project:**
- Discovered a **429% spike in churn** after a policy change
- Projected recovery of **$250,000 in annual revenue** through targeted retention strategies

---

### 🚀 Where do you see yourself in the next 2 years in the data domain?

In the next two years, I see myself growing as a Data Analyst who's not just technically sound but also understands business needs deeply. I want to work on real-world datasets, build dashboards that drive decisions, and gradually move toward advanced analytics and predictive insights.

---

## Technical Questions

## 🐍 Python (Basic to Moderate)

### 1️⃣ What are Python variables? How do you declare them?

Variables in Python are containers used to store data values. You don't need to explicitly declare their data type — Python infers it automatically.

```python
name = "Om"
age = 22
```

Here, `name` is a string, and `age` is an integer.

---

### 2️⃣ Difference between mutable and immutable data types in Python?

**Mutable:** Can be changed after creation (like lists, dictionaries, sets)  
**Immutable:** Cannot be changed once created (like strings, tuples, integers)

```python
a = [1, 2, 3]  # mutable
b = (1, 2, 3)  # immutable
```

---

### 3️⃣ What are lists, tuples, and dictionaries?

- **List:** Ordered, mutable collection  
  Example: `[1, 2, 3]`

- **Tuple:** Ordered, immutable collection  
  Example: `(1, 2, 3)`

- **Dictionary:** Key-value pairs  
  Example: `{"name": "Om", "age": 22}`

---

### 4️⃣ How do you remove duplicates from a list?

Convert it to a set and back to a list:

```python
mylist = [1, 2, 2, 3]
unique_list = list(set(mylist))
```

---

### 5️⃣ Write or explain a pseudo code for a prime number check

```python
num = int(input("Enter number: "))
if num > 1:
    for i in range(2, int(num**0.5) + 1):
        if num % i == 0:
            print("Not Prime")
            break
    else:
        print("Prime")
else:
    print("Not Prime")
```

**Logic:** Loop from 2 to √n and check divisibility.

---

### 6️⃣ What are functions in Python? Give an example

Functions are reusable blocks of code that perform a specific task.

```python
def greet(name):
    return f"Hello, {name}"
```

---

### 7️⃣ What are modules and libraries?

- **Module:** A single Python file containing code (functions, classes)
- **Library:** A collection of related modules packaged together

For example, `math` is a module; `pandas` is a library.

---

### 8️⃣ What libraries are used for data analysis in Python?

Common ones are:

- **Pandas** for data manipulation
- **NumPy** for numerical operations
- **Matplotlib / Seaborn** for visualization
- **Scikit-learn** for machine learning

---

### 9️⃣ How do you handle missing values in a dataset?

Using Pandas:

```python
df.dropna()        # remove missing values
df.fillna(value)   # replace with mean/median or a constant
```

Choice depends on data and context.

---

### 🔟 What's the difference between `is` and `==` operators?

- `==` compares values
- `is` compares memory locations (object identity)

```python
a = [1,2]
b = [1,2]
a == b  # True
a is b  # False
```

---

## 🗄️ SQL (Most Common for Data Analyst)

### 1️⃣ What is SQL?

SQL stands for **Structured Query Language** — used to store, manipulate, and retrieve data from relational databases.

---

### 2️⃣ What are joins?

Joins combine rows from two or more tables based on a related column.

---

### 3️⃣ Explain INNER JOIN, LEFT JOIN, RIGHT JOIN, and FULL OUTER JOIN

- **INNER JOIN:** Returns only matching rows from both tables
- **LEFT JOIN:** All rows from the left table + matching from right
- **RIGHT JOIN:** All rows from right + matching from left
- **FULL OUTER JOIN:** Returns all records from both sides

```sql
SELECT a.name, b.order_id
FROM Customers a
LEFT JOIN Orders b
ON a.customer_id = b.customer_id;
```

---

### 4️⃣ Difference between WHERE and HAVING clauses?

- **WHERE** filters rows before aggregation
- **HAVING** filters after aggregation

```sql
SELECT city, COUNT(*) FROM customers
GROUP BY city
HAVING COUNT(*) > 5;
```

---

### 5️⃣ What is a primary key and a foreign key?

- **Primary key:** Unique identifier for each record in a table
- **Foreign key:** A reference to the primary key in another table

---

### 6️⃣ What is normalization? Why is it important?

Normalization is the process of organizing data to reduce redundancy and improve data integrity. It divides large tables into smaller, related ones.

---

### 7️⃣ Difference between COUNT(*), COUNT(column_name)?

- `COUNT(*)` counts all rows including NULLs
- `COUNT(column_name)` ignores NULLs

---

### 8️⃣ Write a query to get the second highest salary

```sql
SELECT MAX(salary)
FROM employees
WHERE salary < (SELECT MAX(salary) FROM employees);
```

---

### 9️⃣ Explain GROUP BY and ORDER BY clauses

- **GROUP BY** groups rows with the same values
- **ORDER BY** sorts results (ASC/DESC)

```sql
SELECT department, COUNT(*) 
FROM employees 
GROUP BY department 
ORDER BY COUNT(*) DESC;
```

---

### 🔟 Difference between DELETE, TRUNCATE, and DROP

- **DELETE:** Removes specific rows (can use WHERE)
- **TRUNCATE:** Removes all rows, keeps structure
- **DROP:** Deletes the entire table

---

### 1️⃣1️⃣ What are subqueries and when do you use them?

A subquery is a query inside another query, used to filter, compare, or aggregate data dynamically.

---

### 1️⃣2️⃣ How to find customers who never placed an order?

```sql
SELECT c.customer_id, c.name
FROM Customers c
LEFT JOIN Orders o
ON c.customer_id = o.customer_id
WHERE o.customer_id IS NULL;
```

---

## 📊 Power BI (Concept + Visualization)

### 1️⃣ What is Power BI?

Power BI is a business intelligence tool that helps visualize and analyze data using interactive dashboards.

---

### 2️⃣ Key components of Power BI

- **Power Query:** Data extraction and transformation
- **Power Pivot:** Data modeling
- **DAX:** Calculations and measures
- **Visualizations:** Charts, reports, dashboards

---

### 3️⃣ What types of graphs or charts have you used?

Bar, line, pie, map, tree map, and funnel charts.

For example, I used a line chart for monthly trends and bar charts for regional comparisons.

---

### 4️⃣ Difference between Power Query and Power Pivot

- **Power Query:** Used for data cleaning and transformation
- **Power Pivot:** Used for modeling and relationships

---

### 5️⃣ What is DAX? Examples

DAX (Data Analysis Expressions) is used to create calculated columns/measures.

```dax
Profit Margin = DIVIDE(SUM(Sales[Profit]), SUM(Sales[Revenue]))
```

---

### 6️⃣ What is a star schema?

A star schema has one fact table linked to multiple dimension tables. It's used for efficient querying and simpler data modeling.

---

### 7️⃣ How do you make dashboards interactive?

By adding slicers, filters, bookmarks, and drill-throughs so users can explore data dynamically.

---

### 8️⃣ What are measures and calculated columns?

- **Measure:** Calculated at query time (e.g., SUM, AVG)
- **Calculated column:** Stored with data; calculated row-wise

---

### 9️⃣ How to handle large datasets efficiently?

Filter at data source, use star schema, avoid complex visuals, and use measures instead of calculated columns.

---

### 🔟 How to publish and share dashboards?

After creating, publish via Power BI Service, then share links, workspaces, or embed in apps.

---

## 🧮 Excel (Functional + Practical)

### 1️⃣ How much do you know Excel?

I'd rate myself 8/10 — I've used Excel for cleaning, analyzing data, and building summary dashboards.

---

### 2️⃣ Common functions used for analysis

`SUMIF`, `COUNTIF`, `VLOOKUP`, `INDEX-MATCH`, `IFERROR`, `TEXT`, and logical functions like `IF` and `AND`.

---

### 3️⃣ What is a Pivot Table?

A Pivot Table helps summarize and analyze data quickly — grouping and aggregating large datasets without formulas.

---

### 4️⃣ What is conditional formatting?

It highlights cells based on rules — for example, marking sales below 5000 in red.

---

### 5️⃣ How to remove duplicates in Excel?

Go to **Data → Remove Duplicates**, or use formulas like `=UNIQUE(A2:A10)` in newer versions.

---

### 6️⃣ What is a dynamic chart?

A chart that updates automatically when data changes — usually built using named ranges or tables.

---

### 7️⃣ How to handle missing data?

Use filters to find blanks and either replace with average/median or mark as "Not Available."

---

### 8️⃣ Absolute vs Relative cell referencing

- **Absolute:** Fixed reference (`$A$1`)
- **Relative:** Changes when copied (`A1`)

---

### 9️⃣ Data validation in Excel

Used to restrict data entry — e.g., allowing only dates or numbers within a range.

---

### 🔟 Reports or dashboards built in Excel

I've built sales summaries using Pivot Tables, slicers, and conditional formatting before moving to Power BI.

---

## 🧩 OOPs (Object-Oriented Programming)

### 1️⃣ What is OOPs and why is it useful?

Object-Oriented Programming helps structure code using objects and classes, making it reusable, modular, and easier to maintain.

---

### 2️⃣ Four main pillars of OOPs

1. **Encapsulation**
2. **Inheritance**
3. **Polymorphism**
4. **Abstraction**

---

### 3️⃣ Explain inheritance with an example

It allows a class to inherit properties from another.

```python
class Animal:
    def sound(self): 
        print("Animal sound")

class Dog(Animal):
    def sound(self): 
        print("Bark")
```

---

### 4️⃣ What is encapsulation?

Encapsulation means wrapping data and methods together. It protects data from unauthorized access.

Example: Private variables in a class.

---

### 5️⃣ Abstract class vs Interface

- **Abstract class:** Can have both concrete and abstract methods
- **Interface:** Only defines method signatures (no implementation)

---

### 6️⃣ Method overloading vs Method overriding

- **Overloading:** Same method name, different parameters
- **Overriding:** Same method name in child class modifies parent behavior

---

### 7️⃣ What does the `self` keyword do in Python?

`self` refers to the current instance of the class and allows access to class variables.

---

### 8️⃣ Difference between a class and an object

- **Class:** Blueprint or template
- **Object:** Instance of that class

---

### 9️⃣ How is implementing different from inheriting?

- **Inheriting:** Reusing existing code (class-based)
- **Implementing:** Writing code to fulfill an interface or abstract definition

---

### 🔟 Real-life examples of OOP concepts

- **Encapsulation:** Bank account balance access
- **Inheritance:** Car inheriting from Vehicle
- **Polymorphism:** Same "start()" method for Bike, Car
- **Abstraction:** Using ATM — we don't see internal code, only operations

---

## 📝 Quick Tips for Interviews

✅ **Be specific** with numbers and impacts in your project stories  
✅ **Use the STAR method** (Situation, Task, Action, Result) for behavioral questions  
✅ **Practice SQL queries** on paper or whiteboard  
✅ **Prepare 2-3 questions** to ask the interviewer  
✅ **Stay calm** and think aloud when solving technical problems

---

**Good luck with your interviews! 🚀**
